Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Woodruff: THE FEDERAL RESERVE
SCALES BACK, DECIDING TODAY THAT
IT WILL START PUTTING THE BRAKES
ON ITS STIMULUS PROGRAM.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY, A
PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE CALLS
FOR PLACING LIMITED CONTROLS ON
N.S.A. SURVEILLANCE AT HOME AND
ABROAD.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, AN UPDATE
FROM TACLOBAN, WHERE TYPHOON
DAMAGE CAN STILL BE SEEN IN ALL
DIRECTIONS AND A MASSIVE AID
EFFORT KEEPS CHURNI AWANGY.
>> IN THIS TEMPORARY WAREHOUSE,
THERE ARE SOME 200 VOLUNTEERS
FROM THE COMMUNITY PREPARING
CARE PACKAGES FOR AN ESTIMATED
2.5 MILLION TO THREE MILLION
MOUTHS THAT NEED TO BE FED EVERY
SINGLE DAY.
>> Woodrf: TufHOSE ARE JUST
SOME OF THE STORIES WE'RE
COVERING ON TONIGHT'S "PBS
NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: THE FEDERAL RESERVE IS
READY TO BEGIN WINDING DOWN ITS
ECONOMIC STIMULUS.
CHAIRMAN BEN BERNANKE ANNOUNCED
TODAY THE CENTRAL BANK WILL
START REDUCING THE BOND-BUYING
PROGRAM NEXT MONTH.
HE SAID THE ECONOMY HAS
STRENGTHENED ENOUGH TO MAKE IT
POSSIBLE.
WE'LL HEAR SOME OF WHAT BERNANKE
SAID, AND DIG INTO WHAT IT
MEANS, RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
THE FED'S FINDING OF ECONOMIC
PROGRESS SENT WALL STREET
SOARING.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 292 POINTS TO CLOSE NEAR
16,168-- A NEW RECORD.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 46 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,070.
THE SENATE GAVE FINAL APPROVAL
TODAY TO A TWO-YEAR BUDGET
AGREEMENT, 64 TO 36.
IT ERASES $63 BILLION IN
AUTOMATIC, SPENDING CUTS, AND
REPLACES THEM WITH TARGETED CUTS
AND ADDITIONAL REVENUES.
NINE REPUBLICANS JOINED 55
DEMOCRATS AND INDEPENDENTS IN
VOTING "AYE", AFTER SUPPORTERS
AND OPPONENTS JOUSTED OVER  THE
MEASURE.
>> I THINK ONE OF THE PROBLEMS
WE HAVE AROUND HERE OFTEN IS
THAT WE DON'T KNOW HOW TO
DECLARE VICTORY.
WE DON'T CELEBRATE OUR
SUCCESSES.
I'M NOT PREPARED TO DECLARE
VICTORY IN THE FIGHT FOR FISCAL
RESPONSIBILITY, BUT I AM
PREPARED TO DECLARE PROGRESS.
>> WE HAVE BEFORE US A BILL
TODAY THAT IS A PURPORTED
COMPROMISE.
BUT I WANT TO DESCRIBE WHO IT'S
A COMPROMISE FOR.
IT'S A COMPROMISE FOR THE
POLITICIANS.
IT'S NOT A COMPROMISE FOR THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
BECAUSE WHAT IT REALLY DOES IS
INCREASE SPENDING AND INCREASE
TAXES.
>> Ifill: THE BUDGET BILL NOW
GOES TO PRESIDENT OBAMA FOR HIS
SIGNATURE.
AN OUTSIDE REVIEW BOARD HAS
PRESENTED A RAFT OF
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE PRESIDENT
ON CURBING THE GOVERNMENT'S
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS.
THE PROPOSALS TODAY TARGET THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY'S
SWEEPING COLLECTION OF PHONE AND
INTERNET DATA, HERE AND ABROAD.
WE'LL GET THE DETAILS LATER IN
THE PROGRAM.
THE PRIME MINISTER OF UKRAINE
INSISTED TODAY THAT A
RUSSIAN-FINANCED BAILOUT WILL
ENSURE HIS COUNTRY'S ECONOMIC
STABILITY.
YESTERDAY, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN PLEDGED TO BUY
$15 BILLION WORTH OF UKRAINIAN
BONDS AND SLASH THE PRICE OF
RUSSIAN GAS.
IN KIEV OVERNIGHT AND TODAY,
ANTI-RUSSIAN DEMONSTRATORS AGAIN
ACCUSED THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
OF SELLING OUT.
THEY'VE BEEN CAMPED OUT IN
INDEPENDENCE SQUARE FOR WEEKS.
ETHNIC FIGHTING IS THREATENING
TO TEAR APART THE WORLD'S NEWEST
COUNTRY-- SOUTH SUDAN.
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN THE
AFRICAN NATION SAID TODAY AT
LEAST 500 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED SINCE SUNDAY
THIS REPORT IS NARRATED BY
LINDSEY HILSUM OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: THE FOREIGNERS ARE
FLEEING.
AID WORKERS AND DIPLOMATS
GATHERED AT JUBA AIRPORT THIS
MORNING TRYING TO GET ON FLIGHTS
TO NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
FEW SOUTH SUDANESE HAVE THAT
OPTION.
THE U.N. SAYS UP TO 20,000
PEOPLE HAVE SOUGHT PROTECTION IN
THEIR TWO COMPOUNDS IN JUBA
WHERE THEY HOPE THERE'LL BE SAFE
BUT ALTHOUGH FIGHTING EASED
TODAY, JUST RUNNING FOR SHELTER
HAS AT TIMES BEEN DEADLY.
>> ( translated ): MOST
>> Reporter: GOVERNMENT FORCES
APPEAR TO HAVE RETAINED CONTROL
AFTER FIGHTING BROKE OUT BETWEEN
TWO FACTIONS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL
GUARD ON SUNDAY.
THE GOVERNMENT CALLS THISAS A W
COUP ATTEMPT BUT IT SEEMS TO BE
MORE A POLITICAL AND ETHNIC
POWER STRUGGLE.
PRESIDENT SALVA KIIR, AN ETHNIC
DINKA, APPEARED ON TV ON SUNDAY
AND AGAIN TODAY, OFFERING TO
TALK TO HIS ENEMIES,
SPECIFICALLY THE FORMER VICE
PRESIDENT, RIEK MACHAR, WHOM HE
SACKED IN JULY.
MACHAR, AN ETHNIC NUER, DENIES
THAT HE TRIED TO OVERTHROW HIS
FORMER BOSS.
HE HAS REPORTEDLY RETURNED TO
HIS HOME AREA, NORTH OF JUBA.
TODAY, THE U.N. SECRETARY
GENERAL SPOKE TO THE PRESIDENT.
>> I ALSO CALLED ON HIM THE NEED
TO DIALOGUE WITH THE POLITICAL
OPPOSITION.
I WELCOME THE REPORTS FROM THIS
MORNING THAT PRESIDENT SALVA
KIIR IS WILLING TO ENTER INTO
SUCH TALKS.
>> Reporter: ON THE STREETS OF
JUBA AND NOW IN OTHER TOWNS,
SOUTH SUDANESE FEAR WHAT WILL
COME NEXT.
ALREADY SOME NUER SAY THEY'RE
BEING TARGETED BY DINKA SOLDIERS
LOYAL TO THE GOVERNMENT.
IN 2011, SOUTH SUDAN CELEBRATED
INDEPENDENCE FROM THE NORTH
AFTER DECADES OF WAR.
CITIZENS WEPT IN JOY BUT THEY
COULD EQUALLY HAVE SHED TEARS OF
RAGE.
THEIR LEADERS ARE DRAGGING THEM
BACK INTO CONFLICT, CONDEMNING
THEM TO ENDLESS POVERTY AND
STRIFE.
>> Ifill: IN EGYPT, PROSECUTORS
BROUGHT NEW CHARGES AGAINST
OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI
TODAY.
HE'S ACCUSED OF PLOTTING WITH
HAMAS IN GAZA AND HEZBOLLAH IN
LEBANON -- TO WAGE A CAMPAIGN OF
VIOLENCE AFTER HE WAS
OVERTHROWN.
MORSI IS ALREADY ON TRIAL FOR
ALLEGEDLY INCITING THE MURDERS
OF PROTESTERS LAST DECEMBER.
THE U.N. AND EUROPEAN UNION AID
AGENCIES ARE CALLING FOR A
HUMANITARIAN CEASEFIRE IN SYRIA.
THEY SAID TODAY THEY NEED TO
DELIVER CRITICAL SUPPLIES TO
PEOPLE FACING ANOTHER HARSH
WINTER.
MEANWHILE, A GOVERNMENT ASSAULT
ON THE BESIEGED CITY OF ALEPPO
CONTINUED WITH A FOURTH DAY OF
AIR STRIKES.
ACTIVISTS SAY MORE THAN 100
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED IN THAT
TIME.
A MAIN FURE IGIN THE "GREAT
TRAIN ROBBERY" -- 50 YEARS AGO -
- DIED TODAY IN BRITAIN.
RONNIE BIGGS WAS PART OF A GANG
THAT HELD UP THE GLASGOW-TO-
LONDON MAIL TRAIN IN 1963.
THEY GOT AWAY WITH MORE THAN
$50 MILLION IN TODAY'S CURRENCY.
BIGGS WAS CAUGHT, BUT ESCAPED
AND SPENT 35 YEARS AT LARGE.
HE RETURNED TO ENGLAND IN 2001
AND WON HIS RELEASE FROM PRISON
IN 2009.
RONNIE BIGGS WAS 84 YEARS OLD.
A GEORGIA WOMAN WILL GET HALF OF
LAST NIGHT'S HUGE PRIZE OF $648
MILLION IN THE MEGA MILLIONS
LOTTERY.
OFFICIALS IDENTIFIED THE WOMAN
TODAY AS IRA CURRY OF STONE
MOUNTAIN.
SHE BOUGHT HER TICKET AT A TINY
NEWSSTAND IN BUCKHEAD.
THE OTHER WINNING TICKET WAS
SOLD AT A GIFT SHOP IN SAN JOSE,
CALIFORNIA.
TICKET HOLDERS HAVE 180 DAYS TO
CLAIM THE PRIZE.
STILL TO COME ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
THE FED PULLS BACK FROM ITS
STIMULUS; NEW CHANGES FOR A
MAJOR GOVERNMENT SPY AGENCY; THE
SLOW PACE OF RECOVERY IN the
TYPHOON-STRICKEN PHILIPPINES AND
THE WHITE HOUSE PRESS CORPS
PUSHES FOR MORE ACCESS TO THE
NEWS THEY COVER.
PLUS, LOOKING AHEAD TO NEXT
YEAR'S MIDTERM ELECTIONS.
AND PAUL SOLMAN VENTURES INTO
VIRTUAL REALITY.
>> Woodruff: THE FEDERAL RESERVE
HAS BEEN WARNING FOR MONTHS IT
WOULD SHIFT AND REDUCE THE SIZE
OF ITS ROLE IN SPURRING THE
ECONOMY.
BUT RIGHT UP TO THIS AFTERNOON'S
ANNOUNCEMENT, MANY WERE STILL
WONDERING WHEN THE FED WOULD
DIAL BACK AND HOW IT WOULD DO
SO.
BEN BERNANKE CAME TO HIS LAST
SCHEDULED NEWS CONFERENCE AS FED
CHAIRMAN, AS THE CENTRAL BANK
ANNOUNCED IT WILL START SCALING
BACK ITS LONG-RUNNING STIMULUS
PROGRAM.
>> TODAY'S POLICY ACTION
REFLECTS THE COMMITTEE'S
ASSESSMENT THAT THE ECONOMY
CONTINUES TO MAKE PROGRESS, BUT
IT ALSO HAS MUCH FARTHER TO
TRAVEL UNTIL CONDITIONS CAN BE
JUDGED NORMAL.
OUR MODEST REDUCTION IN THE PACE
OF ASSET PURCHASES REFLECT THE
COMMITTEES BELIEF THAT PROGRESS
TOWARDS ITS ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES
WILL BE SUSTAINED.
>> Woodruff: THE FED HAS BEEN
BUYING $85 BILLION IN TREASURY
BONDS EVERY MONTH TO HOLD DOWN
INTEREST RATES AND BOOST
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
STARTING NEXT MONTH, THAT AMOUNT
WILL BE REDUCED BY $10 BILLION A
MONTH.
AT THE SAME TIME, A BENCHMARK
SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE WILL
STAY NEAR ZERO.
THE FED SAYS THAT POLICY WILL
HOLD WELL PAST THE POINT WHEN
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE FALLS
BELOW 6.5%.
IT'S NOW AT 7%.
>> THE JOB MARKET HAS CONTINUED
TO IMPROVE, WITH THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE HAVING
DECLINED FURTHER.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE RECOVERY
CLEARLY RINGS FAR FROM COMPLETE
WITH UNEMPLOYMENT STILL ELEVATED
AND WITH BOTH UNDEREMPLOYMENT
AND LONG TERM UNEMPLOYMENT STILL
MAJOR CONCERNS.
>> Woodruff: FOR BERNANKE, THE
ANNOUNCEMENT IS A CLIMAX TO AN
EIGHT-YEAR TENURE THAT'S BEEN
MARKED BY BIG MOMENTS IN U.S.
FINANCIAL HISTORY.
HE TOOK OVER AS FED CHAIR FROM
ALAN GREENSPAN IN 2006.
TWO YEARS LATER, THE HOUSING
BUBBLE BURST AND FORECLOSURES
EXPLODED.
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
COLLAPSED, TAKING DOWN SOME BIG
BANKS AND SENDING SHOCK WAVES
THROUGH THE STOCK MARKET.
BERNANKE'S FED RESPONDED WITH
MASSIVE BOND-BUYING, STARTING IN
2008, KNOWN AS "QUANTITATIVE
EASING."
NOW, THE CHALLENGE IS TO WEAN
THE ECONOMY FROM THAT SUPPORT.
BUT, BERNANKE CAUTIONED TODAY,
IT ALL DEPENDS ON HOW THE
ECONOMY DOES.
>> THE STEPS WE TAKE WILL BE
DATA DEPENDENT.
IF WE ARE MAKING PROGRESS IN
TERMS OF INFLATION AND CONTINUE
JOB GAINS AND I IMAGINE WE'LL
CONTINUE TO DO PROBABLY AT EACH
MEETING A MEASURED REDUCTION.
IF THE ECONOMY SLOWS FOR SOME
REASON OR WE ARE DISAPPOINTED BY
THE OUTCOMES WE COULD SKIP A
MEETING OR TWO.
ON THE OTHER SIDE IF THINGS
REALLY PICK UP WE COULD GO A
LITTLE BIT FASTER.
>> Woodruff: BERNANKE'S TERM
ENDS ON JANUARY 31.
THE SENATE COULD CONFIRM HIS
SUCCESSOR-- JANET YELLEN-- LATER
THIS WEEK.
WE EXAMINE TODAY'S MOVES AND THE
LARGER IMPACT OF THE FED'S
STIMULUS PROGRAM WITH THREE
PEOPLE WHO WATCH THIS ALL
CLOSELY.
ADAM POSEN WORKED ON THE
MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE FROM
2009 THROUGH 2012 FOR THE
CENTRAL BANK OF ENGLAND.
HE IS NOW THE PRESIDENT OF THE
PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS.
JOHN TAYLOR IS A FORMER
UNDERSECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
DURING THE GEORGE W. BUSH
ADMINISTRATION.
HE IS A PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS
AT STANFORD UNIVERSITY.
AND DAVID WESSEL IS AN ECONOMICS
EDITOR AT THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" AND THE AUTHOR OF
"IN FED WE TRUST."
WELCOME TO YOU ALL THREE.
DAVID WESSEL TO YOU FIRST,
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THE
EXPLANATION OF WHAT THE FED
DID TODAY EXACTLY?
>> WELL, I THINK THE FED IS
BEGINNING THE END OF WHAT
HAS BEEN AN EXTRAORDINARY
PERIOD OF MONETARY POLICY
WHEN BEN BERNANKE BECAME
CHAIRMAN, THEY HAD A
PORTFOLIO OF $800 BILLION.
TODAY IT'S $4 TRILLION,S
THAT-- 4 TRILLION, THAT IS
JUST UNPRECEDENTED BUT HE
MADE CLEAR THEY DR. GOING TO
KEEP INTERESTS RATE VERY LOW
FOR A LONG TIME.
AND THAT SEEMS TO BE WHAT
THE MARKET IS FOCUSED ON.
BECAUSE THE STOCK MARKET WAS
JUST JUMPING FOR JOY AT THIS
ANNOUNCEMENT, NOT FEARING
THAT THE DREADED TAPERING.
>> Woodruff: AND DAVID, WHY
DID THEY DO IT NOW?
>> WELL, MR. BERNANKE SAID
THAT THEY DID IT NOW BECAUSE
THE ECONOMY HAD REACHED THE
POINT WHERE THEY THOUGHT IT
WAS TIME TO START TURNING
THE DIALS.
THE LABOR MARKET HAD
IMPROVED SUBSTANTIALLY.
HE INSISTED IT HAD NOTHING
TO DO WITH THE FACT THAT
HE'S LEAVING OFFICE IN
JANUARY.
BUT IT'S VERY HARD FOR ME TO
BELIEVE IT WASN'T A FACTOR
IN THEIR MIND IT WOULD BE
GOOD TO GET THIS GOING
BEFORE HE HANDED THE GAFFE
TOLD JANET YELLIN, HIS
LIKELY SUCCESSOR.
>> Woodruff: IS THIS THE
RIGHT MOVE?
>> IT'S A MILD MISTAKE.
THE CART IS BEFORE THE HORSE
IN WHAT DAVID JUST SAID IT
WASN'T AN EXTRAORDINARY
PERIOD IN MONETARY POLICY,
IT WAS AN EXTRAORDINARY
PERIOD IN THE ECONOMY.
AND THE MOAN TEAR POLICY
TRIED TO REACT TO THAT.
'S COMING TO THE END OF
THAT EXTRAORDINARY PERIOD.
SO WE'RE SHIFTING A BIT.
PROBABLY THE FED IS TAPERING
A BIT TOO SOON.
BECAUSE THERE'S NO INFLATION
IN SIGHT AND THE
UNEMPLOYMENT IS STILL HIGH.
IT'S NOT A HUGE DEAL ONE WAY
THE THE OTHER.
>> Woodruff: YOU THINK THEY
SHOULD HAVE KEPT THEIR FOOT
ON THE PEDAL.
>> I THINK THEY SHOULD HAVE.
I THINK THERE WAS VERY
LITTLE RISK AND IT WOULD BE
POSSIBLE TO DIAL IT BACK
LATER.
BUT AS YOU AND DAVID
ACKNOWLEDGED, THERE WASN'T
THE KIND OF RIPPLES THROUGH
THE MARKET WE SAW IN MAY
WHEN THE FED FIRST TALKED
ABOUT TAPERING.
I THINK IT'S NOT JUST
THEY'RE USED TO, BUT THE
NEWS HAS BEEN GENERALLY GOOD
ABOUT THE U.S. ECONOMY.
>> Woodruff: JOHN TAYLOR,
WHAT HOW DO YOU READ THIS,
IS IT THE RIGHT MOVE IN YOUR
MIND?
>> I THINK IS I THINK THE
QUAINT TATIVE EASING HAS NOT
BEEN VERY EFFECTIVE.
IT'S-- INTEREST RATES ARE
HIGHER NOW THAN THEY WERE
WHEN QUANTITATIVE EASING 3
BEGAN.
THE PURPOSE WAS TO LOWER
INTEREST RATES.
SO I THINK IT'S A GOOD MOVE
TO BEGIN TO GET OFF OF THIS.
AND HOPEFULLY THE ECONOMY
WILL ACTUALLY BE WORKING A
LITTLE BETTER NOW.
I DON'T THINK IT'S HELPED
THE ECONOMY.
YOUR COMMENT ABOUT THE FED'S
ACTIONS DURING THE PANIC IN
SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER 2008 ARE
WELL TAKENMENT BUT AFTER
THAT I THINK THE
INTERVENTIONS THEY'VE HAD
HAD NOT REALLY HELPED THE
ECONOMY, UNFORTUNATELY.
IT'S BEEN A LOW RECOVERY BY
ANY MEASURE.
AND UNEMPLOYMENT HAS ONLY
COME DOWNGRADE ALLLY.
AND WOULD BE EVEN MUCH
SLOWER IF SO MANY PEOPLE HAD
TO THE DROPPED OUT OF THE
LABOR FORCE.
>> Woodruff: ADAM POSEN, HOW
DO YOU RESPOND TO THOSE
COMMENTS?
>> I THINK JOHN IS MISSING
THE POINT.
WE'VE SEEN IN OTHER
COUNTRIES LIKE GREECE, LIKE
SPAIN, WHERE THEY DIDN'T
EASE MONETARY POLICY SUBJECT
TO THE SAME SHOCK AND THINGS
GOT MUCH WORSE.
WHEN WE SAY THAT THE
QUANTITATIVE EASING, I
BELIEVE QUANTITATIVE EASING
MADE A HUGE DIFFERENCE.
WE HAD FISCAL TIGHTENING AT
THE STATE AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT LEVEL.
AND THEN AT THE FEDERAL
LEVEL OUTSIDE OF 2009.
WE HAD EUROPEAN CRISIS, WE
HAD HOUSEHOLD SAVING EXTRA
AMOUNTS.
SO WE ONLY RECOVERED IN
LARGE PART BECAUSE THE FED
DID THIS WE GOT OURSELVES
BACK TOWARDS NORMAL BECAUSE
OF QE, NOT DESPITE IT.
>> Woodruff: JOHN TAYLOR?
>> NO, I THINK ABOUT THE
PURPOSE OF THE QUANTITATIVE
EASING AS STATED WAS TO
LOWER LONG-TERM INTEREST
RATES AND, IF AGAIN, LOOK AT
Q E3, IT BEGAN JUST IN
DECEMBER OF LAST YEAR,
SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEAR.
AND RATES ARE HIGHER NOW
THAN THEY WERE THEN.
SO HOW YOU CAN SAY IT HELPED.
LOW-INTEREST RATES HAVE NOT
BEEN THE RESULT.
I WOULD SAY AGAIN THE
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THESE
ACTIONS TAKEN IN SEPTEMBER,
OCTOBER 2008.
AND EVERYTHING ELSE SINCE
THEN.
THOSE ACTIONS ARE WERE
CLASSIC CENTRAL BANKING.
THEY WERE GOOD.
BEN BERNANKE DID A GOOD JOB
AT THAT POINT.
BUT SINCE THEN I JUST THINK
THERE'S NOT EVIDENCE.
AND I THINK THE MARKET IS
GOING TO DO BETTER BASICALLY
WHEN THE FED GETS OFF OF
THESE EXTRAORDINARY
UNPRECEDENTED POLICIES.
DAVID'S RIGHT, THERE'S
NOTHING LIKE THIS BEEN DONE
BEFORE IN FEDERAL RESERVE
HISTORY.
AND WHEN THESE KINDS OF
ACTIONS HAVE TO THE BEEN
TAKEN, WHEN THEY'VE BEEN
AVOID, WE'VE HAD A MUCH
BETTER RECOVERY.
THIS IS THE WORST RECOVERY.
>> Woodruff: ADAM POS EN.
>> IT IS DISINGENUOUS OF
JOHN.
BECAUSE THE IDEA THAT THE
ECONOMY IS GOING TO GET
BETTER PROVES THE QE STOPPED
WORKING IS BACKWARDS.
THE REASON THEY ARE EASING
UP ON QE IS BECAUSE THE
ECONOMY IS IMPROVING.
PLAYING THAT GAME DOESN'T
MAKE ANY SENSE.
MORE IMPORTANTLY, IT'S NOT
REASONABLE TO FOCUS-- FOCUS
ON THE-- RATHER THAN THE
GOALS.
WHAT MATTERS IS THE STATE OF
THE ECONOMY, NOT WHAT TOOLS
THEY USE.
>> Woodruff: JOHN TAYLOR YOU
WANT TO COME BECOME AND THEN
I WILL GO TO DAVID WESSEL.
>> THERE IS ABSOLUTELY
NOTHING DISINGENUOUS.
LOOK AT THE DATA, LOOK AT
AMERICAN HISTORY.
YOU CAN SEE WHAT WORKS AND
WHAT DOESN'T.
THIS POLICY HAS NOT WORKED.
I ACTUALLY THINK THAT'S WHY
A LOT OF PEOPLE WANT TO GET
OFF OF IT.
IT'S NOT SOME OF THAT THE
ECONOMY LOOKS BETTER.
IT'S THAT THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO GET BACK TO A
MORE NORMAL POLICY LIKE WE
HAD IN THE 80s AND 90s WHICH
WORKED VERY WELL.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAD BEEN
SKEPTICAL ABOUT THE QE.
IT'S NOT JUST ME, IT'S WHAT
WE SEE WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
DATA.
>> THE MARKET BUYING U.S.
BONDS AND THE ECONOMY IS
RESPONDING AND LOOK AT THE
HOUSING MARKET AND LABOR
DATA THAT BENN BERNANKE
CITED.
YOU'RE JUST IGNORING THE
FED.
>> Woodruff: DAVID, GIVE
THEN DEBATE THAT IS STILL
RAGING OUT THERE ABOUT WHAT
THE FED DID, ANY MORE LIGHT
YOU CAN SHED ON HOW THEY
CAME TO THIS DECISION?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT THERE
WAS SOME DATA AT THE FED
AMONG SOME PEOPLE ABOUT
WHETHER IT WAS REALLY DOING
ANY GOOD.
I THINK IN RESPONSE TO JOHN
TAYLOR THEY SAY THE QUESTION
ISN'T ARE RATES LOWER NOW
THAN THEY WERE WHEN THEY
BEGAN Q E3.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT WOULD
RATES HAVE BEEN HAD THE FED
NOT HAD DONE THIS.
BUT THERE ARE PEOPLE ON THE
FED WHO THOUGHT THIS POLICY
HAD OUTLIVED ITS USEFULNESS.
AND IT WAS CAUSING MORE
CONCERN INSIDE THE FED WHICH
IS WHY THEY DECIDED TO PULL
BACK.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, TO
EMPHASIZE, AND I THINK IT'S
REALLY IMPORTANT, THAT THE
SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES,
THEIR TRADITIONAL TOOL WILL
REMAIN LOW FOR A VERY LONG
TIME.
PROBABLY UNTIL 2015 IF NOT
2016.
AND THAT'S A PRETTY BIG
DEAL.
AND IT MAY GIVE THE ECONOMY
SOME SUPPORT AS THEY BEGIN
TO GET TO MORE NORMAL
SITUATION.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW THAT
BENN BERNANKE IS GOING TO BE
AROUND A LITTLE MORE THAN
ANOTHER MONTH.
SO IT'S NOT THE END OF HIS
TERM BUT WE'RE NEARING THE
END.
AND THIS IS A MOMENT WHEN WE
CAN LOOK, I THINK JUST
BRIEFLY ADAM POSEN, AT HIS
RECORD.
WHAT HAS HE ACCOMPLISHED.
HAS HE ACCOMPLISHED WHAT HE
SET OUT TO ACCOMPLISH?
>> I THINK CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
DID AN INCREDIBLE JOB.
THERE WERE A COUPLE OF
ERRORS.
I THINK THE MISHANDLING OF
THE TAPER ANNOUNCEMENT LAST
MAY.
CERTAINLY HIS ROLE IN THE
EXCESSIVE DEREGULATION,
LOOSE UP SUPERVISION IN THE
EARLY 2,000 BUT EVERYTHING
ELSE WAS GREAT.
THEY REACTED TO THE PANIC IN
2008/2009.
THEY GOT INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENT ON LOOSENING
POLICY.
HE INCREASED THE
TRANSPARENCY OF THE FED.
HE CREATIVELY CAME UP WITH
NEW METHODS WHEN THEY
COULDN'T CUT INTEREST RATES
BELOW 0.
AND HE HAS SPOBLY HOO TUCKED
TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, I
THINK HE HAS DONE GREAT.
>> Woodruff: JOHN TAYLOR,
HOW WOULD YOU SIZE UP BEN
BERNANKE AT THIS POINT?
>> I THINK THE ACTIONS TAKEN
DURING THE PANIC IN
SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER 2008 WERE
GOOD.
CLASSIC CENTRAL BANKING,
LENDER OF LAST RESORT
PROVIDING LIQUIDITY AM BUT
IF YOU LOOK BEFORE AND AFTER
THAT, I THINK YOU HAVE TO
ASK QUESTIONS.
OVERO AFTER PERSON BERNANKE
JOINED THE FEDERAL RESERVE
BOARD THEY HELD INTEREST
RATES QUITE LOW FOR A LONG
TIME.
I THINK THAT ADDED TO THE
HOUSING BOOM, TO THE SEARCH
FOR YIELD AND THE
RISK-TAKING.
AND THEN WHEN THE BUS CAME
AS A RESULT OF THIS BOOM,
THE ACTION WAS QUITE SLOW.
THEY THOUGHT IT WAS
LIQUIDITY.
THEY PUMPED LIQUIDITY IN AND
DIDN'T ADDRESS THE PROBLEM.
THE BAILOUTS BEGAN WITH BEAR
STEARNS.
BUT THEN THERE WAS
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT LEEMAN
CAUSED A LOT OF PROBLEMS IN
THE MARKETS.
THEN YOU GO BEYOND THE PANIC
ITSELF IN TO 2009, 10 AND TO
THE PRESENT AND I THINK
THESE VERY UNPRECEDENTED
POLICIES WERE NOT WHAT THE
ECONOMY NEEDED.
THE FED'S GROWTH RATES WERE
FORECAST MUCH HIGHER THAN
WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED WITH
THE POLICIES.
YOU CAN-- WE CAN DEBATE THIS
FOR A LONG TIME BUT I THINK
THE RECORD IN TERMS OF
UNEMPLOYMENT, BUSINESS
CYCLE, STABILITY IS NOT SO
GOOD DURING THIS PARTICULAR
TERM.
>> Woodruff: DAVID WESSEL, I
WILL LET YOU WRAP THIS UP,
DESCRIBING HOW YOU THINK
BERNANKE HAS CHANGED THE
FED.
>> RIGHT, I THINK HE'S
CHANGED THE FED
FUNDAMENTALLY.
WE WERE USED TO HAVING VERY
AUTOCRATIC FED CHAIRMAN,
PAUL VOLCKER, ALAN
GREENSPAN.
HE BROUGHT MUCH OPENNESS,
DEMOCRACY TO THE FED TCHLTED
WILL BE A PROBLEM FOR THE
SUCCESSOR JANET YELLIN.
AN EVEN WHEN WE GET BACK TO
THE BOND BUYING RETURN TO
NORMAL FROM 0, I THINK THE
FED WILL BE A MORE OPEN
PLACE.
20 YEARS AGO THE FED DIDN'T
EVEN ANNOUNCE WHEN IT MADE
AN INTEREST RATE DECISION.
TODAY THE FEDERAL REZFB
CHAIRMAN SPENT 67 MINUTES
EXPLAINING WHAT THEY DID ON
LIVE TV.
THAT'S A CHANGE THAT WILL
NOT EVER BE PUT BACK INTO
THE BOTTLE.
>> Woodruff: WE ARE GOING TO
LEAVE IT THERE.
WE HAVE A LITTLE MORE TIME
TO LOOK AT HIS TENURE.
WE APPRECIATE ALL THREE OF
YOU BEING WITH US.
DAVID WESSEL, JOHN TAYLOR,
ADAM POSEN.
>> Ifill: NOW, STRIKING THE
BALANCE BETWEEN LIBERTY AND
SECURITY.
AN INDEPENDENT COMMITTEE
APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT
CALLED TODAY FOR NEW RULES TO
GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Brown: THE 300-PAGE REPORT
RECOMMENDS SCORES OF CHANGES IN
HOW THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
GATHERS INTELLIGENCE.
IT URGES THE MASSIVE AMOUNT OF
PHONE RECORD DATA COLLECTED BY
THE AGENCY BE STORED BY
TELEPHONE COMPANIES THEMSELVES
OR A THIRD PARTY.
IT ALSO PROPOSES REQUIRING A
COURT TO APPROVE INDIVIDUAL
SEARCHES OF PHONE AND INTERNET
RECORDS.
AT THE WHITE HOUSE, PRESS
SECRETARY JAY CARNEY SAID
PRESIDENT OBAMA PLANS NO PUBLIC
MMENCOT ON THE FINDINGS.
>> IN JANUARY, WHEN THE OVERALL
INTERNAL REVIEW IS COMPLETED,
THE PRESIDENT WILL MAKE REMARKS
ABOUT THE WORK THAT HE HAS
UNDERTAKEN AND THE OUTCOMES OF
HIS REVIEW.
>> Brown: THE OUTSIDE ASSESSNTME
WAS ORDERED AFTER FORMER N.S.A.
CONTRACTOR EDWARD SNOWDEN LEAKED
SECRET DETAILS ABOUT THE
AGENCY'S EFFORTS LAST SUMMER.
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS MAINTAIN
THEIR DATA COLLECTION OPERATION
HAS THWARTED A NUMBER OF TERROR
ATTACKS.
BUT OPPONENTS ARGUE IT GOES TOO
FAR.
CARNEY INSISTED THE PRESIDENT'S
TOP PRIORITY IS THE SAFETY AND
SECURITY OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> HE DOES BELIEVE THAT WE CAN
TAKE STEPS TO REFINE OUR
PRACTICES AND MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE COLLECTING INTELLIGENCE,
GATHERING INTELLIGENCE IN A WAY
THAT SERVES OUR SECURITY NEEDS
IN A FOCUSED WAY, AND NOT JUST
BECAUSE WE CAN BECAUSE WE HAVE
THE CAPACITY TO DO SO.
>> Brown: THE FULL REPORT WAS
ORIGINALLY EXPECTED TO BE
RELEASED IN JANUARY.
BUT CARNEY SAID THE
ADMINISTRATION DECIDED TO
RELEASE IT EARLY BECAUSE INITIAL
REPORTS WERE INACCURATE.
FOR MORE ON WHAT THE REVIEW
PANEL IS RECOMMENDING WE TURN TO
MICHAEL LEITER, THE FIRST
DIRECTOR OF THE "NATIONAL
COUNTERTERRORISM CENTER" UNDER
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
HE IS NOW WITH A PRIVATE
TECHNOLOGY FIRM.
AND KATE MARTIN, THE DIRECTOR OF
THE CENTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY
STUDIES, A CIVIL LIBERTIES
ADVOCACY GROUP.
FIRST I WOULD LIKE TO JUST
GET AN OVERVIEW OF HOW YOU
READ THE PANEL.
LET'S START WITH YOU, KATE
MARTIN.
HOW STRONG IS THIS?
>> IT'S VERY STRONG.
IT'S RECOMMEND AN END TO THE
BULK COLLECTION PROGRAM TORE
TELEPHONE RECORDS.
IT QUESTIONS THE-- ALL OF
THE VARIOUS PROGRAMS FOR
BULK COLLECTION.
IT HAS SOME SPECIFIC
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGING
TO OTHER AUTHORITIES.
AND IT HAS A LOT OF
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
INCREASING TRANSPARENCY ON
THIS KIND OF NATIONAL
SECURITY INTELLIGENCE
GATHERING.
>> Brown: MICHAEL LEITER,
HOW DO YOU READ IT.
>> I AGREE WITH SOME OF WHAT
KATE SAY T IS RELATIVELY
STRONG.
IT ACTUALLY DOESN'T
RECOMMEND THE TERMINATION OF
ANY OF THESE PROGRAMSMENT IT
RECOMMENDS CHANGING HOW THEY
ARE DONE AN HIGH LATES
THE-- HIGHLIGHTS THE PRORNS
OF TRANSPARENCY AN
OVERSIGHT.
SO I THINK IT IS A
MODIFICATION, AND NOT A
REVOLUTION.
>> Brown: WELL SPECIFICALLY
ONE OF THE BIG ONES IS TO
TAKE THE DATA AND KEEP IT
WITH THE PHONE COMPANIES OR
A THIRD PARTY, AS OPPOSED TO
THE GOVERNMENT.
WHAT WOULD THAT DO?
>> CORRECT SO, THIS IS
TALKING ABOUT TELEPHONE
METADATA, THE LENGTH OF
CALLS, WHO MADE THE CALLS, I
SHOULD SAY THE NUMBERS THAT
MADE THE CALLS.
RIGHT NOW THE NSA, THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
HOLDS ALL OF THAT DATA AND
ANALYZES IT ON ITS OWN.
IT RECOMMENDS NEW
LEGISLATION SO THE PHONE
COMPANIES ARE AN OUTSIDE,
AND THE NSA WOULD HAVE TO
GET JUDICIAL APPROVAL TO
ACTUALLY DO SEARCHES AGAINST
IT.
I THINK THAT'S QUITE GOOD IN
TECHNOLOGY ALLOWS THAT TO
OCCUR IN THE FUTURE.
IT INSURANCES THAT THERE IS
LESS OF A PRIVACY INVASION
BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT
WOULDN'T HOLD THE DATA.
BUT IT STILL PROVIDES THE
NSA WITH THE FLEXIBILITY IT
NEEDS TO DO THE SORTS OF
SEARCHES TO FIND NATIONAL
SECURITY THREATS.
>> YOU WOULD AGREE THAT THAT
IS A GOOD MOVE?
>> I WOULD GREAT-- AGREE IT
IS A GOOD MOVE.
I WOULD DISAGREE OF HOW
MAJOR OF A MOVE IT.
AT THE MOMENT WHAT THE LAW
PROVIDES IS THAT THE
GOVERNMENT GOS AND HAS MADE
A DATABASE WITH FIVE YEARS
OF METADATA ON EVERY CALL BY
EVERY AMERICAN.
THIS RECOMMENDATION WOULD
STOP THAT.
THE GOVERNMENT WOULD NO
LONGER HAVE A DATABASE LIKE
THAT.
AND INSTEAD WHEN THEY HAD A
SPECIFIC TELEPHONE NUMBER
THAT THEY BELIEVED WAS
REASONABLY CONNECTED TO A
TERRORIST, THEY WOULD GO TO
A JUDGE, GET PERMISSION TO
THEN GO TO THE TELEPHONE
COMPANIES AND ASK FOR
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT
TELEPHONE NUMBER.
AND THE REPORT IS VERY
DETAILED ABOUT THE REASONS
WHY A BULK DATABASE OF
INFORMATION ON AMERICANS IS
A BAD IDEA.
AND NOT NECESSARY FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY.
AND QUITE DIFFERENT WERE
ALLOWING THE GOVERNMENT TO
GO TO THE PHONE COMPANIES.
>> Brown: DO YOU SEE,
MICHAEL LEITER, THINS HERE,
SPECIFIC THINGS OR IN THE
TOTALITY THAT WOULD HARM THE
GO-- THAT GO TOO FAR ON THE
SECURITY SIDE?
>> I DON'T REALLY SEE ANY
INDIVIDUAL RECOMMENDATIONS
HERE THAT ARE PROBLEMATIC.
WHAT DOES CONCERN ME IS THAT
TAKEN IN TOTALITY, IF THESE
THINGS ARE APPLIED WITH THE
SORT OF BUREAUCRACY THAT CAN
SIM THE
GOVERNMENT, IT COULD SLOW
THINGS DOWN SIGNIFICANTLY.
>> Brown: SUCH AS, GIVE US
AN EXAMPLE.
>> WELL, THERE IS MUCH MORE
RESPONSIBLE FOR FISA COURT
JUDGES,S THIS'S NOT ALL BAD.
THERE IS A LARGER ROLE FOR
THE PRESIDENT'S CIVIL
LIBERTIES OVERSIGHT BOARD.
THERE IS MORE OF A ROLE FOR
THE FISA COURT REVIEWING
WHAT THE FBI DOES.
SO IN SOME, ALL OF THESE
THINGS I THINK DO POSE A
RISK OF SLOWING DOWN THE
BROADER SYSTEM AND MAKING
INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS MUCH
MORE RISK AVERSE.
BUT I THINK THE DEVIL WILL
BE IN THE DETAILS.
THIS IS REALLY THE FIRST
SALVO.
WE'LL HAVE TO WAIT AND SEE
WHAT THE PRESIDENT SAYS AND
ULTIMATELY WHAT CONGRESS
DOES ON THE LEGISLATIVE
FRONT.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU THINK,
A LOT OF THESE THINGS HE'S
TALKING ABOUT GO TO THE
TRANSPARENCY QUESTION.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: AN ACCOUNT ABILITY
AND OVERSIGHT.
>> YES.
>> Brown: SO YOU PUT THEM
ALL TOGETHER AND THE
QUESTION IS IT TOO MUCH,
DOES IT SLOW DOWN, DOES IT
MAKE SECURITY LESS EFFECT
SNIFF.
>> WELL, I THINK THE ANSWER
TO THAT IS THAT TWO MEMBERS
OF THIS HAND PICKED PANEL BY
THE PRESIDENT, OF COURSE,
WERE FORMER EXTREMELY SENIOR
OR HIGH LEVEL
COUNTERTERRORISM OFFICIALS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THEY SAY
IN THEIR REPORT IS THAT THEY
LOOKED AT THESE PROGRAMS AND
THEY DIDN'T FIND THE
PROGRAMS TO BE NECESSARY FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY.
SO THE QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT IT SLOWS IT
DOWN, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE
SAYING WE'VE GOT TO READJUST
THE PROGRAMS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT IS
OBSCURED WITH ALL DUE
RESPECT, I THINK, IS WE'RE
NOT TALKING ABOUT IN THE
MAIN HERE, INTEL AGAINST
GATHERING IN A WAR ZONE, IN
IRAQ OR AFGHANISTAN.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
GOVERNMENT GATHERING
INFORMATION ON ITS OWN
CITIZENS.
AND SO YES, YOU WANT IT
SLOWED DOWN.
AND IN FACT, ONE OF THE
IMPORTANT INSIGHTS IN THE
REPORT IS THAT SECURITY IS
BOTH A MATTER OF NATIONAL
SECURITY AND PRIVACY.
AND THE FACT THAT THAT
CONCLUSION WAS REACHED BY
FORMER COUNTERTERRORISM
OFFICIALS, I HOPE THE
PRESIDENT TAKES THAT INTO
ACCOUNT.
>> Brown: YOU WANT TO
RESPOND TO THAT?
>> WELL, I MEAN I THINK-- I
HOPE IT IS READILY PARENT
THAT PRIVACY AND CIVIL
LIBERTIES ARE A NATIONAL
SECURITIES-- AS WELL, THERE
IS NO DOUBT ABOUT THAT.
I COMMEND THE PANEL FOR
TALKING ABOUT THE WAYS IN
WHICH TRANSPARENCY AND
OVERSIGHT CAN BE IMPROVED.
I ACTUAL LEW JUST THINK THAT
KATE MISREADS SOME OF THIS.
FIRST OF ALL, MANY OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS ARE TO THE
ABOUT U.S. PERSONS.
SO THERE IS MUCH IN HERE
WHICH IS ABOUT OTHER
PROGRAMS WHICH THE REVIEW
GROUP SPECIFICALLY SAYS ARE
QUITE HELPFUL TO INCLUDE
SOME OF THE E-MAIL
COLLECTION ISSUES.
AND WHAT I WOULD STRESS
AGAIN IS THIS GROUP DOES NOT
ACTUALLY RECOMMEND THE
TERMINATION OF THESE
PROGRAMS.
IT RECOMMENDS A MODIFICATION
FOR GREATER OVERSIGHT,
GREATER TRANSPARENCY, AS A
GENERAL MATTER I THINK
THAT'S AN OUTSTANDING THING.
>> COULD I JUST --
>> OKAY, VERY BRIEFLY.
>> QUOTE, WE RECOMMEND THAT
THIS PROGRAM, THE TELEPHONE
MEHTADATA PROGRAM SHOULD BE
TERMINATED AS SOON AS
REASONABLY PRACTICABLE.
THAT IS SOMETHING THE
PRESIDENT CAN DO ON HIS OWN.
>> VERY QUICKLY WHAT KATE
DOESN'T SAY IS THAT SHE
THEN-- THEY THEN RECOMMEND
LEGISLATION TO ALLOW THE
TELEPHONE COMPANIES TO DO
THIS SO NSA CAN SEARCH THAT
SAME DATA.
>> NO, IT IS KLER THAT
LEGISLATION IS NOT
NECESSARY.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, WE WILL
END BUT I WANT TO SAY THERE
IS A LOT MORE THERE AND
KNEES ARE RECOMMENDATIONS.
THERE GOING TO BE DEBATE
FORD SOME TIME.
WE'LL COME BACK TO IT.
MICHAEL LEITER, AND KATE
MARTIN, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY ANNOUNCED TODAY THE
UNITED STATES WILL PROVIDE $25
MILLION IN ADDITIONAL AID TO
HELP THE PHILIPPINES RECOVER
FROM THE DEVASTATING TYPHOON
THAT STRUCK THAT COUNTRY LAST
MONTH.
KERRY VISITED HARD-HIT TACLOBAN,
AND ALSO SPOKE OF THE NEED TO
ACT TO PREVENT GLOBAL WARMING
AND EXTREME WEATHER.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO IS IN THE PHILIPPINES
AND FILED THIS REPORT ON THE
RECOVERY EFFORT.
>> Reporter: TACLOBAN, THE
TYPHOON ZONES MAIN CITY, REMAINS
UNDER A THICK BLANKET OF DEBRIS,
RUBBLE AND DOWNED TREES.
MANY OF THE 1,800-PLUS PEOPLE
STILL LISTED AS MISSING WERE
TRAPPED UNDERNEATH.
THE TALLY OF BODIES STILL BEINGH
WEEK.
BY NOW DECOMPOSED WELL BEYOND
RECOGNITION, THEY ARE ADDED TO
THE CONFIRMED DEATH TOLL OF MORE
THAN 6,000.
FIVE WEEKS AFTER HYNAN OR
YOLANDA, AS THE PHILIPPINES
NAMED THE EPIC TYPHOON, RELIEF
WORKERS SAY THERE HAS BEEN
PROESS,GR EVEN THOUGH IT'S HARD
TO SEE AT FIRST GLANCE.
ELIZABETH TROMANS IS WITH
CATHOLIC RELIEF SERVICES
>> I CAN SEE A LOT MORE ROOFS ON
BUILDINGS, I CAN SEE A LOT MORE
PARTIALLY DAMAGED WALLS THAT
HAVE BEEN PATCHED UP WITH TARP
OR WITH SALVAGED IRON SHEETING
THAT USED TO BE ON TOP OF ROOFS,
YOU CAN HEAR THE CHAIN SAWS
BUZZING IN THE BACKGROUND
THERE'S A LOT OF LUMBER BEING
CUT UP SO, IT'S OPEN UP NEW
AREAS.
IT'S EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: FAMILIES LIKE THE
BRIONES-- RONALD, HIS WIFE
MAGNOLIA, HER MOTHER AND TWO
TEENAGE SONS-- HAVE RETURNED TO
THE SPOT WHERE ONCE STOOD THEIR
MODEST TWO-STORY HOME.
ALL BUT A TWISTED HEAP OF
ELECTRONIC PLASTIC AND REBAR WAS
WASHED OUT TO SEA.
WASHED ASHORE WHEN THEY
RETURNED, ONE ALMOST NEXT DOOR
TO THEM, WERE SEVERAL CARGO
SHIPS CONTAINING LOADS OF
CEMENT.
BUT THE BRIONES FAMILY'S MOST
BASIC NEEDS, SO DESPERATELY
LACKING IN THE EARLY DAYS, ARE
NOW BEING MET.
>> ( translated ): WE GET RICE,
FISH, SOME VEGETABLES, NOODLES,
SARDINES.
>> Reporter: THE FOOD COMES NOT
FROM A MARKET BUT FROM WHAT
SEEMS LIKE A TYPHOON OF FOOD
AID.
24 HOURS A DAY, SEVEN DAYS A
WEEK IN THIS TEMPORARY
WAREHOUSE, SOME 200 VOLUNTEERS
FROM THE COMMUNITY PREPARE CARE
PACKAGES FOR THE 2.5 MILLION TO
THREE MILLION MOUTHS THAT NEED
TO BE FED, EVERY SINGLE DAY.
THE VOLUNTEERS ARE SUPERVISED BY
STAFF FROM THE PHILIPPINE
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE.
SOLDIERS HELP SORT AND PACK
OTHER CONSIGNMENTS IN A NEARBY
BUILDING.
IF THERE'S A GO TO PERSON HERE,
IT'S OLIVER BARTOLO.
HE'S NOT WITH ANY AID AGENCY OR
THE GOVERNMENT BUT ON LOAN, AS
ITS CONTRIBUTION TO THE RELIEF
EFFORT FROM U.P.S., UNITED
PARCEL SERVICE.
BARTOLO ARRIVED A WEEK AFTER THE
DISASTER, TASKED TO BRING
COHERENCE TO CHAOS.
>> MOST OF THE INCOMING RELIEF
GOODS, THEY WERE JUST UNLOADED
IN THE WAREHOUSE AND JUST
STACKED WITHOUT ANY DATES IN IT,
NO LABELING, SO IT WOULD BE HARD
FOR US TO TRACK WHAT HAS COME IN
FIRST THAT NEEDS TO COMES OUT
FIRST ALSO.
YOU HAVE A REAL HARD TIME
KNOWING WHAT YOU HAVE?
RIGHT, THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S HARD TO COORDINATE.
>> Reporter: BARTOLO HAS BEGUN
TO DO THAT NOW WITH A TEN MEMBER
TEAM, INCLUDING PEOPLE FROM
OTHER FREIGHT COMPANIES.
THEY'VE BROUGHT EQUIPMENT,
TRCKS UAND FORKLIFTS AND, AS
FILIPINOS, CRITICAL EXPERTISE.
>> WE'VE NOW GOT IT SEEMS LIKE A
SURPLUS OF EMPTY CONTAINERS AT
THE PORT.
>> Reporter: ON THIS DAY AN
OFFICIAL WITH THE U.N.'S WORLD
FOOD PROGRAM NEEDED EMPTY
FREIGHT CONTAINERS CLEARED AWAY
AT TACLOBAN'S SMALL PORT.
NEW SHIPMENTS OF THE CRITICAL
STAPLE RICE WERE DUE IN SOON AND
BARTOLO PROMISED TO SPEAK TO THE
OFFICIAL IN CHARGE.
>> I CAN SPEAK TO HER AND
PROBABLY WE CAN FIND A PLACE
WHERE YOU CAN PUT ALL THOSE
THINGS.
>> Reporter: WITH SO LITTLE TIME
AND SPACE AND SO MUCH NEED, THE
FOOD PROGRAM'S TOMMY THOMPSON
SAYS BARTOLO'S TEAM HAS
SHORTENED DELIVERY TIMES BY
DAYS.
>> WHAT THEY REALLY PROVIDE IS
LOCAL EXPERTISE, BECAUSE WE'RE
REALLY IN A RACE AGAINST TIME.
THEY CAN ALERT US TO WAY SYSTEMS
WORK IN THE COUNTRY.
SO WE NOW KNOW HOW TO IMPORT,
HOW THINGS SHOULD BE LABELED SO
WE DON'T HAVE CUSTOMS DELAYS.
>> Reporter: BACK AT THE
WAREHOUSES, BARTOLO'S BIG
CHALLENGE IS TO SHIP THINGS OUT
WITHOUT DELAY.
HE WORRIES A LOT OF IT IS IN
DANGER OF ROTTING IN THE HEAT
AND HUMIDITY.
>> ESPECIALLY THE RICE.
IN THE AFTERNOON, THERE'S ALWAYS
A DOWNPOUR AND WERE AFRAID THAT
SOME OF THE ROOFING OF THE
WAREHOUSE ARE NOT YET REPAIRED
SO THERE ARE LEAKS.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, RELIEF
OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST THE MOST
BASIC FOOD NEED IS BEING MET.
THE ON GOING CHALLENGE WILL BE
TO KEEP REPLENISHMENTS MOVING IN
AND OUT SWIFTLY.
THE NEXT PRIORITY FOR MANY IN
THE RECOVERY EFFORT IS
SANITATION-- EVERYTHING FROM
LATRINES TO TOILETRY ESSENTIALS.
>> THIS IS MEANT FOR A FAMILY OF
FIVE FOR A MONTH.
>> Reporter: BUT CATHOLIC RELIEF
SERVICES ELIZABETH TROMAN'S SAYS
PEOPLE ARE BEGINNING TO LOOK
BEYOND THEIR MOST BASIC DAILY
NEEDS.
>> THE THING THAT WE HEAR IS
SHELTER, SHELTER IS OUR
PRIORITY.
SO MANY PEOPLE LOST THEIR HOMES.
C.R.S. RIGHT NOW IN THE FIRST
MONTH WE'VE BEEN FOCUSING ON
EMERGENCY SHELTER, WE'VE BEEN
GIVING TARP, A STURDY TARP ALONG
WITH NAILS AND SOME TOOLS SO
THAT PEOPLE CAN ERECT SOMETHING
VERY SIMPLE FOR A CLOSED
STRUCTURE FOR THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: THE BRIONES AND
NEIGHBORS WHO'VE LIVED IN THESE
INFORMAL WATERFRONT SHANTY TOWN
FOR DECADES MAY NEVER GET BEYOND
THAT MAKESHIFT HOUSING.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECLARED THIS
LOW LYING LAND OFF LIMITS TO
HOUSING IN THE FUTURE TO PROTECT
PEOPLE FROM FUTURE STORMS.
BUT MAGNOLIA BRIONES IS NOT SURE
WHERE THEY COULD GO.
IN THIS DENSELY POPULATED
VISAYAN ISLAND, THERE'S LITTLE
LAND TO BE HAD AND AS SIMPLE
LABORERS THEY COULDN'T AFFORD IT
ANYWAY.
NOT THAT STAYING HERE IS WORRY
FREE, ESPECIALLY FOR THEIR 14-
YEAR-OLD, SON RONALD JUNIOR, WHO
HAS NIGHTMARES AND SLEEPS
CLINGING TO HIS PARENTS.
>> ( translated ): HE'S SCARED
OF THE BIG WAVES, WORRIED THAT A
BIG BOAT WILL SLAM INTO US.
>> Reporter: IT'S HARD TO
IMAGINE BUT THIS FAMILY IS STILL
BETTER OFF THAN TENS OF
THOUSANDS WHO REMAIN IN
EVACUATION CENTERS, IN TENTS, A
HANDFUL EVEN ON THE CEMENT
SHIPS, NOW FIRMLY BEACHED, THEIR
HULLS A MASS OF HARDENED
CONCRETE.
>> Ifill: FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A LOOK AT HOW
THE WHITE HOUSE SHAPES THE
PRESIDENTIAL IMAGE, AND A
POSSIBLE TRUCE BETWEEN THE PRESS
CORPS AND THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION OVER ACCESS TO
THE PRESIDENT.
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN HAS
OURTOR SY.
>> Reporter: THESE ARE FAMILIAR
IMAGES TO MANY AMERICANS, ALL
CAPTURED BY OFFICIAL WHITE HOUSE
PHOTOGRAPHER PETE SOUZA.
THEY SHOW PRIVATE MOMENTS:
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA
SPEAKING WITH PAKISTANI ACTIVIST
MALALA YOUSAFZI OR LUNCHING WITH
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON, BUT MANY OTHERS
WERE TAKEN WHILE NEWS
PHOTOGRAPHERS COVERING THE
PRESIDENT WERE EXCLUDED, SUCH AS
DURING MISTER OBAMA'S AIR FORCE
ONE FLIGHT TO SOUTH AFRICA WITH
FORMER PRESIDENT GEORGE W BUSH.
SUCH EXAMPLES HAVE CAUSED A
SIMMERING FEUD BETWEEN THE WHITE
HOUSE AND THE PRESS, WITH
PHOTOGRAPHERS AND REPORTERS
ARGUING THEIR ACCESS TO THE
PRESIDENT IS MORE RESTRICTED
THAN IN THE PAST.
McCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS' SENIOR
WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT STEVEN
THOMMA:
>> WE EXPECT A SMALL GROUP OF
JOURNALISTS AT A MINIMUM TO BE
ALLOWED INTO THE ROOM IN THE
WHITE HOUSE OR ELSEWHERE WHEN
HE'S MEETING WITH A FOREIGN
LEADER, WHEN HE'S MEETING WITH
HIS CABINET, WHEN HE'S MEETING
WE ARE GRANTED ACCESS LESS AND
LESS SINCE THIS WHITE HOUSE TOOK
OVER IN 2009.
>> Reporter: OF COURSE, THERE
ARE SOME REMARKABLE  MOMENTS THE
PRESS WOULDEVER N BE ASKED TO
WITNESS.
BUT OTHERS ARE NOT SO
EXTRAORDINARY, AND THERE'S THE
RUB, SAYS THOMMA, PRESIDENT OF
THE WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENTS
ASSOCIATION.
>> INCREASINGLY, AS THEY RELEASE
THEIR OWN PHOTOS AND VIDEOS OF
THESE EVENTS, IT UNDERSCORES TO
US AS A PRESS CORP, THAT THEY
KNOW THESE ARE OF PUBLIC
INTEREST.
>> Reporter: THE TENSION SPILLED
INTO WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY
JAY CARNEY'S REGULAR BRIEFING
LAST WEEK.
FROM YOUR END, THAT YOU THINK
IT'S AN-- YOU THINK THIS IS NOW-
- IS THAT A FAIR?
>> THAT WE'RE GOING TO WORK WITH
THE PRESS AND WITH THE
PHOTOGRAPHERS TO, YOU KNOW, TRY
TO ADDRESS SOME OF THEIR
CONCERNS.
WHAT I CAN ALSO ASSURE YOU IS
THAT WE WILL NOT CREATE A DAY
THAT HAS NEVER EXISTED, AT LEAST
IN MODERN TIMES, WHEN EVERYONE
IN THE WHITE HOUSE PRESS CORPS
IS SATISFIED WITH THE AMOUNT OF
ACCESS THEY GET TO THE
PRESIDENT.
THAT WOULD BE, I THINK,
IMPOSSIBLE TO EXPECT.
>> Reporter: IMAGES MATTER TO
EVERY WHITE HOUSE, ACCORDING TO
MARTHA JOYNT KUMAR, A POLITICAL
SCIENTIST AT TOWSON UNIVERSITY
WHO STUDIES THE PRESIDENCY AND
THE MEDIA.
>> PICTURES REALLY SEND A
MESSAGE TO PEOPLE.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT SPEAKS
DIRECTLY TO THEM.
ONE ASPECT I THINK THAT'S
INVOLVED HERE IN THE
PHOTOGRAPHERS' ISSUE, IS THAT,
THE WHITE HOUSE PHOTOGRAPHER IS,
TO BE A PHOTOGRAPHER NOT ONLY OF
THE PRESIDENT, FOLLOWING THE
PRESIDENT AROUND, BUT IT IS OF
THE PRESIDENCY ITSELF AS AN
INSTITUTION.
AND GIVING PEOPLE A SENSE OF
WHAT THE PRESIDENCY IS.
AND WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE IS, HOW
THE WHITE HOUSE OPERATES.
>> Reporter: ADMINISTRATIONS
HAVE BEEN USING THE TOOLS AT
THEIR DISPOSAL FOR YEARS TO
RELAY THE PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
AND SHAPE HOW HE IS VIEWED BY
THE PUBLIC.
>> STAFF-- THE PRESIDENT'S STAFF
TEND TO BE RISK AVERSE.
AND NOBODY WANTS TO BE THE
PERSON WHO RECOMMENDED THAT THE
PRESIDENT DO THE PRESS BRIEFING
OR TAKE PICTURES THAT GET TURNED
AGAINST HIM.
AND HAVE THE PRESIDENT SAY, "WHO
RECOMMENDED THIS," SO NOBODY
WANTS TO BE IN THAT POSITION.
IF THE PRESIDENT IS THE RISK
TAKER, BECAUSE THE WHITE HOUSE
STAFF REFLECTS THE PRESIDENT, IT
DOESN'T COMPLEMENT HIM.
>> Reporter: MISTER OBAMA  WAS
THE FIRST PRESIDENT TO HIRE AN
OFFICIAL WHITE HOUSE
VIDEOGRAPHER.
ARUN CHAUDHARY FOLLOWED THE
PRESIDENT FROM HIS 2008 CAMPAIGN
UNTIL 2011.
>> AT THE WHITE HOUSE IN THE
MORNING I WOULD PROBABLY TAKE A
LOOK AT THE PRESIDENT'S
SCHEDULE.
AND FROM A HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE THINK WHAT ARE THE
MOST IMPORTANT THINGS TO CAPTURE
FOR HISTORY.
I THINK THE PRESIDENT HAS A LOT
OF BACK AND FORTH WITH THE
MEDIA, JUST LIKE ALL PRESIDENTS
AND THAT THE ISSUES ARE
FUNDAMENTALLY THE SAME, I THINK
WHAT'S CHANGED IS THE MEDIA
LANDSCAPE, THE WAY PEOPLE GET
NEWS, THE MANNERS IN WHICH THEY
ARE ABLE TO ACCESS IT AND IN
GENERAL, JUST THE ECONOMICS OF
HOW IT ALL WORKS.
>> Reporter: CARNEY AND WHITE
HOUSE STAFF MET TUESDAY
AFTERNOON WITH THOMMA AND OTHERS
FROM THE PRESS CORPS TO SEEK
SOME RESOLUTION.
THE PRESS ORGANIZATION SAID IT
WAS ENCOURAGED BY THE MEETING
AND THAT THEY WOULD CONTINUE AN
ONGOING DIALOGUE WITH WHITE
HOUSE STAFF.
THE COOPERATIVE TONE MAY GET AN
EARLY TEST.
THE PRESIDENT LEAVES FRIDAY FOR
A FAMILY VACATION IN HAWAII, AN
ACTIVITY THAT'S GIVEN RISE TO
PRESS COMPLAINTS ABOUT ACCESS TO
THE PRESIDENT IN THE PAST.
>> Ifill: 'TIS THE SEASON FOR
POLITICAL RETIREMENTS.
THREE SENIOR MEMBERS OF THE
HOUSE ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY THEY
ARE HEADING FOR THE EXITS,
GIVING EACH PARTY NEW
OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD OF THE
NOVEMBER MIDTERM ELECTIONS.
WE EXAMINE THE LANDSCAPE ONE
YEAR OUT WITH "NEWSHOUR"
POLITICAL EDITOR CHRISTINA
BELLANTONI.
CHRISTINA, DO THESE BENEFIT
ONE PARTY OR THETHER O.
>> RETIREMENT IS ALWAYS
OFFER ANY PARTY AN
OPPORTUNITY BECAUSE THERE IS
A POWER OF INCUMBENCY.
SO DEMOCRATS LIKE THEIR
CHANCES IN VIRGINIA WHERE
FRANK WOLF HAS RETIRED THERE
HE IS A LONG TIME
REPUBLICAN.
ONE OF THOSE GROWING OUTER
SUBURBS THAT ARE KEY TO
DEMOCRAT'S WINNING IN THAT
BATTLEGROUND STATE.
AND THEN YOU ALSO SEE IN
IOWA WHICH IS A LONG TIME
SWING STATE, YOU'VE GOT A
REPUBLICAN TOM LATHAM
RETIRING THERE FOR MANY
YEARSING NEVER REALLY RAN
STATEWIDE, THOUGHT MAYBE HE
WOULD A SENATE CANDIDATE,
NOW HE IS LEAVING, BOTH PAETS
SEE POTENTIAL OPPORTUNITIES
THERE.
THEN OF COURSE THERE IS UTAH,
JIM MATHISON, AND HE IS A
LONG TIME DEMOCRAT.
AND REPUBLICANS SAY THIS IS
A VERY GOOD SEAT FOR THEM.
THIS IS ONE OF SEVEN VERY
REPUBLICAN DISTRICTS THAT
GEORGE W. BUSH WON, JOHN
McCAIN WON, MITT ROMNEY WON
SO THAT IS A SEAT DEMOCRATS
AREN'T GOING TO BE ABLE TO
CAPTURE.
THEY NEED 17 SEATS TO BE
ABLE TO RECLAIM CONTROL OF
THE HOUSE THAT IS A LONG WAY
AWAY.
>> Ifill: THAT WAS ALWAYS
CONSIDERED TO BE A LONG WAY
AWAY BUT IT DOESN'T HELP
WHEN PEOPLE DECIDE TO
RETIRE.
>> NOT AT ALL AM THEY DON'T
LIKE DEFENDING OPEN
SEES-- SEATS BUT REPUBLICANS
ARE RETIRING 11 TO TO 1
VERSUS DEMOCRATS.
WHEN YOU TALK TO THEM THEY
SEE THAT AS EXPANDING THEIR
MAP.
THEY SEE OPPORTUNITIES IN
PLACES LIKE ARKANSAS, NORTH
CAROLINA, OTHER PLACES IN
SOUTH FLORIDA, SOME OTHER
STATES LIKE THAT.
>> Ifill: WELL, LET'S TALK
ABOUT THE SENATE, BECAUSE IN
THE SENATE THERE ARE ALSO
RETIREMENTS AND THERE'S A
BETTER CHANCE OF GAING INOR
REGAINING CONTROL FOR
REPUBLICANS, PERHAPS.
>> THE SENATE REPUBLICANS
NEED SIX NET SEATS TO BE
ABLE TO TAKE CONTROL BACK.
THREE OF THOSE SEATS MIGHT
LOOK PRETTY EASY.
YOU'VE GOT WEST VIRGINIA
WHERE JAY ROCKEFELLER A
DEMOCRAT IS RETIRING, SOUTH
DAKOTA AND MONTANA, THOUGH
ARE PRETTY LIKELY REPUBLICAN
PICKUPS.
THAT'S ONLY REALLY THREE
SEATS THEY NEED TO WIN TO
GET CONTROL BACK THERERE A
INCUMBENTS ON THE ROPES.
>> Ifill: LET'S START WITH
NORTH CAROLINA, CAY HAGEN.
>> A FIRST TERM DEMOCRAT,
CLOSE TO THE PRESIDENT, SHE
HAS TAKEN VOTES THAT PUT HER
AT RISK.
BUT IT IS ONE OF THOSE
STATES THAT IS REALLY
CHANGING IN ITS DEMOGRAPHICS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WON IT IN
2008.
TRIED TO WIN IT IN 2012 AND
CAME CLOSE.
THE DEMOCRATS ARE REALLY
PUTTING A LOT OF ENERGY
THERE.
IF SHE CAN HOLD ON IT SHOWS
THE CHANGING DEMOGRAPHICS OF
THIS AREA.
>> Ifill: AND IN ARKANSAS
MARK PRYOR REASONS THIS IS
AN INTERESTING STATE,
ARKANSAS USED TO BE A
DEMOCRATIC STATE.
IT HAS BEEN TRENDING
REPUBLICAN.
HE'S NOT VERY POPULAR RIT
NOW BUT HE TRIED TO DISTANCE
HIMSELF FROM THE PRESIDENT
AS MUCH AS HE CAN.
THERE IS THE POER WITH OF
INCUMBENCY OF COURSE, HE IS
RUNNING AGAINST A FRESHMAN
REPUBLICAN HOUSE MEMBER, NOT
NECESSARILY THAT POPULAR BUT
HE IS RUNNING ATED THAT IS
TOM COTTON.
>> Ifill: NOW THERE IS ALSO
AN OFF CHANCE THAT GEORGIA
MIGHT ENTER IN THE DEBATE
THAT IS AN OPEN SEAT.
>> YOU HAVE CHAMBLISS
RETIRING AND ONE OF THE DEM
2K3WR59-- DEMOCRATIC STARS
OF THE NATIONAL PARTY THIS
YEAR, IS MICHELLE NUNN.EQU RESTE
A LOT OF MONEY.
THE DAUGHTER OF A FORMER
SENATOR, WELL-KNOWN, THE
WOMAN BEING AT THE TOP OF
AT THE SAME TIM THERE IS AN
INTERESTING GOVERNOR'S RACE
HAPPENING WITH JIMMY
CARTER'S GRANDSON RUNNING.
AND SO MAYBE THAT'S GOING TO
BE TOO BIG NAME DEMOCRATS
THAT COULD HELP THINGS.
AND RUBLIEPCANS HAVE A VERY
INTENSE PRIMARY IN THAT
SENATE SIDE.
MULTIPLE CANDATEDIS FIGHTING
IT OUT.
AND THAT COULD END UP
HELPING THE DEMOCRATS.
ANOTHER STATE WHERE CHANGING
DEMOGRAPHICS MIGHT BE
SOCIETIES THIS CAN PICK UP.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO STEP
AWAY FROM ALL OF THESE
SEATS.
BECAUSE THEY MEAN MORE THAN
JUST INDIVIDUAL RACES.
2014 COULD BE A REAL
CRITICAL ELECTION.
>> AND WHAT ARE THE ISSUES
THAT ARE DRINGIV ALL OF
THESE ELECTIONS ON EITHER
SIDE.
>> HEALTH CARE REMAINS A BIG
ISSUE ACTUALLY FOR BOTH
PARTIES.
REPUBLICANS THINK THIS IS A
WINNING ISSUE.
THEY SAY THEY WILL CONTINUE
TO CRITICIZE THE PRESIDENT,
HOPE HIS APPROVAL RATING
CONTINUE TO GO DOWN.
BOTH HOUSE AND SENATE RACES
THEY THINK IF THEY TIE
DEMOCRATS TO THE PRESIDENT
IN AN UNPOPULAR HEALTH CARE
LAW THAT COULD HELP THEM.
BUT THE PRESIDENT AND
DEMOCRATS THINK THE HEALTH
CARE ERETH ARE A LOT OF GOOD
THINGS ABOUT.
WE'LL KEEP RUN ON THAT.
AND THE DEMOCRATIC MESSAGE
IS REALLY POINTING AT WILL
CANSMENT THEY JUST WANT TO
REPEAL ALL OF THE GOOD
THINGS IN THE HEALTH CARE
LAW.
THEY JUST WANT TO FOCUS ON A
BROKEN WEB SITE AND NOT
REALLY THE BIGGER PICTURE.
THAT WILL CONTINUE TO BE THE
BATTLE.
THE THIRD STRAIGHT ELECTION
WE'RE RUNNING ON THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
>> Ifill: IT KEEPS COMING
BACK.
BUT ARE THERE ANY OTHER
ISSUES, SPENDING, IS IT TAX,
IS IT THE THINGS WE USUALLY
ARE USED TO HEARING ABOUT.
>> THERE'S PLENTY OF THAT
AND REPUBLICANS ARE SAYING
THEY ARE THE FISCAL
STALWARTS.
THIS HE ARE ALSO SAYING
PEOPLE LIKE A CHECK AND
BALANCE ON A DEMOCRATIC
ADMINISTRATION SO MAYBE THEY
DESERVE TO KEEP DIVIDED
GOVERNMENT.
SO DEMOCRATS ARE TALKING
ABOUT THE SO-CALLED-- SAYING
THAT REPUBLICANS WANT TO GET
INVOLVED IN WOMEN'S HEALTH
ISSUES, OR TAKE THOSE TYPES
OF THINGS AWAY FROM THEM.
SO YOU WILL KEEP HEARING
THOSE THEMES.
BUT IT'S BEEN EFFECT ANY A
LOT OF PLACES INCLUDING IN
THIS LAST GOVERNOR'S CONTEST
IN VIRGINIA.
>> Ifill: NOW JUST TO WRAP
IT UP, PEOPLE LOOK AT
MIDTERM ELECTIONS AND IT'S
USUALLY TO THE GOOD NEWS FOR
AN INCUMBENT PRESIDENT.
BUT THIS IS A LAME DUCK
PRESIDENT.
DOES THE PRESIDENT RIGHT NOW
ROCK BOTTOM UNPOPULARITY
WHERE HE IS, DOES THAT
AFFECT WHAT HAPPENS IN THESE
RACES IN THE OUTCOME?
NESS WITH BOTH PARTIES WILL
SAY IT DEPENDS ON WHERE YOU
ARE LOOKING.
IN THE CASE OF TOM LATHAM WE
TALKED ABOUT FROM IOWA, THEY
DID A POLL IN THAT DISTRICT,
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS AT 61%
DISAPPROVAL THERE.
THAT MATTERS.
BUT IN A STATE WHERE IT'S
MAYBE MORE LIBERAL, IT WILL
NOT NECESSARILY MATTER.
THE SENATE RACES ARE
PROBABLY A LITTLE CLOSER TO
IT.
>> Ifill: CHRISTINA
BELLANTONI, YOU SPENT A
COUPLIERS HERE AS OUR
POLITICAL EDITOR AND NOW ARE
LEAVING DOES TO BECOME
EDITOR AND CHIEF OF ROLL
CALL, THANK SO MUCH FOR
EVERYTHING YOU'VE DONE FOR
US.
>> THANK YOU.
MISS THE NEWSHOUR ALREADY.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT.
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN TAKES
A LOOK AT A TECHNOLOGY THAT
ALLOWS ADVENTUROUS USERS TO
EXPLORE THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS
IN THE WORLD OF VIDEO GAMING.
IT'S PART OF HIS ONGOING
COVERAGE "MAKING SENSE OF
FINANCIAL NEWS."
OLD NAMED PALMER LUCKY WHO WOULD
FINALLY MAKE SCIENCE FICTION
DREAMS COME TRUE.
WORKING IN HIS PARENTS GARAGE,
HE COBBLED TOGETHER A HEADSET
OUT OF SKI GOGGLES, SMARTPHONE
AND TABLET PARTS TO CREATE A
JUST-LIKE-REAL-LIFE GAMING
EXPERIENCE.
THEN, HOPING TO RAISE $250,000
TO TAKE HIS INVENTION TO MARKET,
HE TURNED TO THE CROWDFUNDING
WEBSITE KICKSTARTER.
>> SO JOIN THE REVOLUTION.
MAKE A PLEDGE.
AND HELP UP CHANGE GAMING
FOREVER.
>> Reporter: WITHIN DAYS, HE HAD
TEN TIMES WHAT HE NEEDED, AS
GAMERS WENT GAGA OVER THE
GOGGLES.
>> GAMES ARE SOMETHING I'M
REALLY PASSIONATE ABOUT AND THE
PROBLEM WAS THERE WAS NOTHING
THAT GAVE ME THE EXPERIENCE THAT
I WANT, THE MATRIX, WHERE I CAN
PLUG IN AND ACTUALLY BE IN THE
GAME.
>> Reporter: THE OCULUS RIFT
HEADSET IS STILL JUST A
PROTOTYPE.
TO SEE HOW FAR VIRTUAL REALITY
WILL ACTUALLY GO, WE VISITED
STANFORD UNIVERSITY'S VIRTUAL
HUMAN INTERACTION LAB.
>> THIS IS THE BEST VIRTUAL
EXPERIENCE YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
IN THE ENTIRE WORLD RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: LAB FOUNDER JEREMY
BAILENSON IS A TECHNOLOGIST AND
A PSYCHOLOGIST.
>> VIRTUAL REALITY IS BASICALLY
TWO THINGS: TRACKING YOUR BODY
MOVEMENTS AND SENDING NEW
INFORMATION TO YOUR EYES AND
EARS, BASED ON THOSE MOVEMENTS.
>> Reporter: TO MAKE THAT
HAPPEN, ALL YOU NEED ARE EIGHT
CAMERAS TO TRACK THE POSITIONS
OF ALL YOUR BODY PARTS,
ACCELEROMETERS TO MONITOR YOUR
HEADS ROTATION, DOZENS OF
SPEAKERS FOR SURROUND SOUND
MAYBE A FLOOR PLATE THAT
VIBRATES WITH BASS FREQUENCIES
ALL RUN BY A ROOMFUL OF
COMPUTERS.
>> THE JOB OF THESE MACHINES IS
TO CONTINUALLY CHANGE WHAT YOU
SEE, WHAT YOU HEAR AND WHAT YOU
FEEL ON YOUR SKIN AS A FUNCTION
OF HOW YOU'VE MOVED.
>> Reporter: VIVID GRAPHICS
DON'T TRICK THE BRAIN, SAYS
BAILENSON; MOVEMENT DOES.
>> IT'S NICE TO HAVE GOOD
GRAPHICS BUT WHAT'S CRITICAL IS
VERY ACCURATELY TRACKING THE
POSITION OF YOUR HEAD, YOUR
HANDS, YOUR BODY.
AND SO IN THIS LAB WE TRACK YOUR
HAND POSITION TO AN ACCURACY OF
ONE MLIMEILTER.
AND WE DO IT 200 TIMES A SECOND.
IT'S THE ACCURACY AND THE
TEMPORAL FREQUENCY THAT'S
IMPORTANT.
AND FOR V.R. TO WORK, WE'VE GOT
TO SHOW YOU DIFFERENT STUFF AS A
FUNCTION OF YOU TURNING YOUR
HEAD.
AND WHEN YOU BEND DOWN THE WORLD
NEEDS TO CHANGE.
AND WHEN YOU PUT YOUR ARM UP YOU
NEED TO SEE YOUR ARM.
>> Reporter: AND WHEN YOU'RE
IMMERSED IN A SIMPLE GRAPHIC
VERSION OF THE VERY ROOM I WAS
STANDING IN.
>> SO WHAT I WANT YOU TO DO IS
LOOK DOWN.
NOW, CODY CAN YOU...
>> Reporter: WHOA!
OH MY GOD.
I'M NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO WALK
ACROSS IT.
>> YOU DON'T HAVE TO WOULD YOU
LIKE A ROOM THAT'S LESS SCARY?
>> Reporter: YES.
>> Reporter: NOW THE POINT OF
AIRING THIS SEQUENCE IS NOT TO
HUMILIATE ME-- THOUGH IT MANAGES
TO DO A PRETTY GOOD JOB-- BUT TO
SHOW HOW ABSOLUTELY
TRANSFORMATIVE THIS NEW
TECHNOLOGY MIGHT BE.
V.R. IS ALREADY USED
PROFESSIONALLY FOR EVERYTHING
FROM VEHICLE DESIGN TO FLIGHT
SIMULATION, TO SURGICAL
TRAINING, TO PSYCHOTHERAPY.
AND WHEN IT DOES HIT THE
CONSUMER MARKET, IT WON'T BE
JUST FOR GAMES.
CAN'T MAKE IT TO FLORENCE THIS
YEAR, OR MAYBE EVER, TO SEE
MICHELANGELO'S MOST FAMOUS
STATUE?
WANT TO DUCK THE CROWDS?
IFYOU  CAN'T COME TO THE DAVID,
THE DAVID CAN COME TO YOU.
>> AND OPEN YOUR EYES.
>> Reporter: OH MY GOD, THAT'S
UNBELIEVABLE.
HOW ABOUT SEEING THE DAVID IN A
COMPLETELY NEW WAY?
LIKE BEING THE DAVID?
>> STEP INTO DAVID.
SHARE HIS BODY SPACE.
>> Reporter: HOLY SMOKES.
IN CASE YOU'RE WONDERING, IT'S
NOT JUST YOUR TREPID REPORTER
WHO HAD SUCH VIOLENT REACTIONS.
THOUGH NON-VIDEO GAME GEEZERS DO
SEEM ESPECIALLY SUSCEPTIBLE.
>> OH, LORDY!
>> Reporter: THIS OCUS RULIFT
TRIAL USER IS ACTUALLY NOT FAR
FROM DAVID AT THE MOMENT, IN THE
COUNTRYSIDE OF VIRTUAL TUSCANY.
>> I CAN'T BELIEVE IT!
IT'S REALLY BEAUTIFUL!
>> Reporter: AND THINK HOW
COMMON ONLINE VIDEO CHATS ARE
BECOMING, AND WHAT THEY WILL BE
LIKE IN VIRTUAL REALITY.
WE SAW AN EARLY EXAMPLE LAST
YEAR WITH FUTURIST RAY KURZWEIL.
>> IT'S NOT THAT DIFFERENT FROM
WHAT WE HAVE TODAY, JUST MUCH
MORE POWERFUL.
>> Reporter: AND WHY LIMIT THOSE
CHATS TO THE LIVING, ASKS
VIRTUAL REALITY PIONEER JARON
LANIER?
>> THERE'S ALSO THIS FUNDING OF
SORT OF FAKE IMMORTALITY, WHERE
YOU CREATE MEDIA EFFECTS OR SORT
OF FAKE GHOSTS OF PEOPLE WHO'VE
DIED, SO THAT OTHER PEOPLE CAN
INTERACT WITH THEM AS IF THEY'RE
STILL ALIVE.
A GENERATION OR TWO FROM NOW
THIS WILL BE PART OF OUR
EXPERIENCE IN THE SAME WAY THAT
MOVIES, AND LITERATURE, AND
VIDEO GAMES ALREADY ARE.
FORCE FOR GOOD?
FORCE FOR ILL?
>> EVERY NEW CAPABILITY THAT
PEOPLE ACHIEVE CAN GO EITHER
WAY, AND NO AMOUNT OF TECHNICAL
PROWESS CAN MAKE PEOPLE BETTER.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
HAS TO COME FROM A DIFFERENT
SENSIBILITY; A MORAL
SENSIBILITY; AN ETHICAL
SENSIBILITY; AND THAT'S NOT A
PROBLEM WE CAN SOLVE IN THE LAB.
>> Reporter: LET'S HOPE IT'S A
PROBLEM WE CAN SOLVE IN REAL
LIFE, THOUGH, OR IN WHATEVER
MIGHT TAKE ITS PLACE.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE FEDERAL RESERVE ANNOUNCED
IT'S SCALING BACK STIMULUS
EFFORTS BECAUSE THE ECONOMY IS
GETTING STRONGER.
WALL STREET RALLIED SHARPLY
HIGHER ON THE NEWS.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS GAINED 292
POINTS.
THE SENATE GAVE FINAL APPROVAL
TO A TWO-YEAR BUDGET AGREEMENT.
AND A PRESIDENTIAL REVIEW BOARD
CALLED CURBING THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY'S SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS.D THAT'S THE "NEWSHOURR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT PUTIN'S ANNUAL
NEWS CONFERENCE.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
WSHONEUR," THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.